---
title: "Multiple-Tasks on Multiple-Devices (MTMD): Exploiting Concurrency in Heterogeneous Managed Runtimes"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-04-16-VEEML
excerpt: ''
date: 16/04/2021
venue: 'VEE 2021, Virtual Execution Environments'
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Michail Papadimitriou, Eleni Markou, Juan Funero, Athanasios Stratikopoulos, Florin Blanaru and Christos Kotselidis. Multiple-Tasks on Multiple-Devices (MTMD): Exploiting Concurrency in Heterogeneous Managed Runtimes . VEE 2021.' 
---

### Abstract

Authors: Michail Papadimitriou, Eleni Markou, Juan Funero, Athanasios Stratikopoulos, Florin Blanaru and Christos Kotselidis.

Modern commodity devices are nowadays equipped with a plethora of heterogeneous devices serving different purposes. 
Being able to exploit such heterogeneous hardware accelerators to their full potential is of paramount importance in
the pursuit of higher performance and energy efficiency. Towards these objectives, the reduction of idle time of each
device as well as the concurrent program execution across different accelerators can lead to better scalability within
the computing platform. 


In this work, we propose a novel approach for enabling a Java-based heterogeneous managed runtime to automatically and 
efficiently deploy multiple tasks on multiple devices. We extend TornadoVM with parallel execution of bytecode interpreters 
to dynamically and concurrently manage and execute arbitrary tasks across multiple OpenCL-compatible devices. In addition, 
in order to achieve an efficient device-task allocation, we employ a machine learning approach with a multiple-classification 
architecture of Extra-Trees-Classifiers. Our proposed solution has been evaluated over a suite of 12 applications split into 
three different groups. Our experimental results showcase performance improvements up 83% compared to all tasks running on the
single best device, while reaching up to 91% of the oracle performance.



* Pre-print: It will available soon! 

* Video recording: It will available soon
