---
title: "Automatically Exploiting the Memory Hierarchy of GPUs through Just-in-Time Compilation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-04-16-VEE21
excerpt: ''
date: 16/04/2021
venue: 'VEE 2021, Virtual Execution Environments'
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Michail Papadimitriou, Juan Fumero, Athanasios Stratikopoulos and Christos Kotselidis. Automatically Exploiting the Memory Hierarchy of GPUs through Just-in-Time Compilation . VEE 2021.' 
---

### Abstract

Authors: Michail Papadimitriou, Juan Fumero, Athanasios Stratikopoulos and Christos Kotselidis.

Although Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become pervasive for data-parallel workloads, the efficient exploitation of their 
tiered memory hierarchy requires explicit programming. The efficient utilization of different GPU memory tiers can yield higher 
performance at the expense of programmability since developers must have extended knowledge of the architectural details in order 
to utilize them. 


In this paper, we propose an alternative approach based on Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation to automatically and transparently exploit 
local memory allocation and data locality on GPUs. In particular, we present a set of compiler extensions that allow arbitrary Java 
programs to utilize local memory on GPUs without explicit programming. We prototype and evaluate our proposed solution in the context 
of TornadoVM against a set of benchmarks and GPU architectures, showcasing performance speedups of up to 2.5x compared to equivalent 
baseline implementations that do not utilize local memory or data locality. In addition, we compare our proposed solution against 
hand-written optimized OpenCL code to assess the upper bound of performance improvements that can be transparently achieved by JIT 
compilation without trading programmability. The results showcase that the proposed extensions can achieve up to 97% of the performance
of the native code, highlighting the efficiency of the generated code.

* Pre-print: [link](https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/automatically-exploiting-the-memory-hierarchy-of-gpus-through-justintime-compilation%288c2ba9c6-cef3-42c5-9f49-a87c97eaecd7%29.html)

* Video recording: It will available soon

